so I'm going to talk about trust and I'm
going to start by reminding you of the
standard views that people have about
trust I think these are so commonplace
they've become clichés of our society
and I think the three ones acclaim there
has been a great decline in trust very
widely believed the second is an aim we
should have more trust and the third is
a task we should rebuild trust I think
that the claim the aim and the task are
all misconceived so what I'm going to
try to tell you today is a different
story about a claim and aim and a task
which I think give one quite a lot
better purchase on the latter first the
claim why do people think Trust has
declined and if I really think about it
on the basis of my own evidence I don't
know the answer I don't I'm inclined to
think it may have declined in some
activities or some institutions and it
might have grown in others I don't have
an overview but of course I can look at
the opinion polls and the opinion polls
are supposedly the source of a belief
that trusts has declined when you
actually look at opinion polls across
time it's not much evidence for that
that's to say the people who were
mistrusted 20 years ago principally
journalists and politicians are still
mistrusted and the people who were
highly trusted 20 years ago are still
rather highly trusted judges nurses the
rest of us in between and by the way the
average person in the street is almost
exactly midway but is that good evidence
what opinion polls record is of course
opinions what else can they record so
they're looking at the generic attitudes
that people report when you ask them
certain questions
do you trust politicians do you trust
teachers
now if somebody said to you do you trust
green grocers do trust fishmongers do
you trust elementary school teachers you
would probably begin by saying to do
what and that would be a perfectly
sensible response and you might say when
you understood the answer to that well I
trust some of them but not others that's
a perfectly rational thing in short in
our real lives we seek to place trust in
a differentiated way we don't make an
assumption that the level of trust that
we will have in every instance of a
certain type of official or office
holder or type of person is going to be
uniform I might for example say that I
certainly trust a certain elementary
school teacher I know to teach the
reception class to read but no way to
drive the school minibus I might after
all know that she wasn't a good driver I
might trust my most Lucretia's friend to
keep a conversation going but not to
manage too he could keep a conversation
going but perhaps not to keep a secret
simple so if we've got those evidence in
our ordinary lives of the way that Trust
is differentiated why do we sort of drop
all that intelligence when we think
about trust more abstractly
I think the polls are very bad guides to
the level of trust that actually exists
because they try to obliterate the good
judgment that goes into placing trusts
secondly what about the aim the aim is
to have more trust well frankly I think
that's a stupid a it's not what I would
aim at I would aim to have more trust in
the trustworthy but not in the
untrustworthy
in fact I aim positively to try not to
trust the untrustworthy and I think of
those people who for example place their
savings with the very aptly
named mr. Madoff who then made off with
them and I think of them I think well
yes too much trust more trust is not an
intelligent aim in this life
intelligently placed and intelligently
refused trust is the proper aim what
once was said that one says yeah okay
that means that what matters in the
first place is not trust but
trustworthiness its judging how
trustworthy people are in particular
respects and I think that judgment
requires us to look at three things are
they competent are they honest are they
reliable and if we find that a person is
competent in the relevant matters and
reliable and honest we'll have a pretty
good reason to trust them because
they'll be trustworthy but if on the
other hand they're unreliable we might
not I have friends who are competent and
honest but I would not trust them to
post a letter because they're forgetful
I have friends who are very confident
they can do certain things but I realize
that they overestimate their own
competence I'm very glad to say I don't
think I have many friends who are
competent and reliable but extremely
dishonest if so I haven't yet spotted it
but that's what we're looking for
trustworthiness before Trust Trust is
the response trustworthiness is what we
have to judge and of course it's
difficult across the last few decades we
tried to construct systems of
accountability for all sorts of
institutions and professionals and
officials and so on that will make it
easier for us to judge their
trustworthiness a lot of these systems
have the converse effect they don't work
as they're supposed to
I remember I was talking with a midwife
who said well you see the problem is it
takes longer to do the paperwork than to
deliver the baby and all over our public
life our institutional life we find that
problem that the system of
accountability that is meant to secure
trust with innocent and evidence
trustworthiness is actually doing the
opposite it is distracting people who
have to do difficult tasks like midwives
from doing them by requiring them to
tick the boxes as we say you could all
give your own examples there so so much
for the aim the aim I think is more
trustworthiness and that is going to be
different if we are trying to be
trustworthy and communicate our
trustworthiness to other people and if
we are trying to judge whether other
people or office elders or politicians
or trust with it it's not easy it is
judgment and simple reaction attitudes
don't do do adequately here now thirdly
the task calling the task rebuilding
trust I think also gets things backwards
it suggests that you and I should
rebuild trust well we can do that for
ourselves we can rebuild a bit of
trustworthiness we can do it to people
together trying to improve trust but
Trust in the end is distinctive because
it's given by other people you can't
rebuild what other people give you you
have to give them the basis for giving
you their trust so you have to I think
be trustworthy and that of course is
because you can't fool all of the people
all of the time usually but you also
have to provide usable evidence that you
are trustworthy how to do it well every
day all over the place it's being done
by ordinary people by officials by
institutions quite effectively let me
give you a simple commercial example the
shop where I buy my socks says I may
take them back and if they don't ask any
questions they take them back and give
me the money or give me the pair of
socks of the colour I wanted that's
super I trust them because they have
made themselves vulnerable to me it was
a big lesson in that if you make
yourself vulnerable to the other party
then that is very good evidence that you
are trustworthy
and you have confidence in what you are
saying so in the end I think what we're
aiming for is not very difficult to
discern it is relationships in which
people are trustworthy and can judge
when and how the other person is
trustworthy so the moral of all this is
we need to think much less about trust
let alone about attitudes of trust
detected or miss detected by opinion
polls much more about being trustworthy
and how you give people adequate useful
and simple evidence that you're
trustworthy Thanks
[Applause]
[Music]